Hello and welcome back.
Let's talk about our first design principle which is programming to an interface so the word interface
here is a bit overloaded usually overloaded means there's many meanings.
When we talk about interface there's the concept of the interface but then also there's the Java construct.
The Java keyword interface are two separate concepts interface in general is a term used to describe
what a client uses.
Sort of like a contract the interface keyword in Java also represents that but it's very specific to
Java.
It's a keyword where you actually would need to implement that interface and so forth.
So we should understand the differences.
When we say interface here the concept of the interface and then also the Java construct interface.
And after this point when I've been using the term interface for the most part I've been using it kind
of interchangeably.
But let's kind of understand that difference.
So what is program through an interface mean what it really means is program to a super type.
So super type can be a base class or it can be interface type the declared type of the variables should
be a super type usually an abstract class or an interface it doesn't have to be the Java construct of
an interface and after classes also that because you can pass around the Super type and essentially
use polymorphism.
That's really the goal.
The objects assigned to those variables can be of any concrete implementation of this super type.
It's usually again polymorphism we create a reference to a super type.
We pass it around and then we can dynamically at runtime have different implementations that can be
an abstract class.
It can be an interface reference the class declaring them doesn't have to know about the actual object
types.
Right.
You just pass around that reference.
So really we're talking about programming to a super type.
You do not declare variables to be instances a particular country concrete class.
Instead when you're programming to an interface you commit only to that interface defined by that abstract
class and again abstract class meaning either an interface keyword or the abstract class in Java an
abstract class is a class that may have some default behavior may also have some member variables in
interface and Java can have default behavior now.
Now with the nice new Java versions but it doesn't usually have attributes.
And so when we talk about programming to interface in this relation we basically say we can declare
variables to be instances of a particular concrete class you don't want to do that you just want to
commit to the interface and again this is an abstraction technique.
Right.
We only know about the interface.
We don't know necessarily about the details of the implementation so we always program for this interface.
We don't program for the implementation.
This provides for a distraction leads to much more flexible code.
When you change the code all the time you would just change the details of the implementation.
You don't have to constantly change the interface when you don't constantly changing interface.
You don't affect the client.
The person using that interface.
So it's much more flexible you can work with any new implementation of the interface.
All right.
The interface doesn't change program to an interface is a common theme of design patterns.
We'll see that quite a bit where we have interfaces or abstract classes
manipulating objects solely in terms of the interface is very very beneficial to clients.
I've said this briefly but basically clients do not need to know the specific types of the objects they
use.
They just refer to the reference type in the interface as long as the objects adhere to the interface
that the clients expect.
Clients do not need to know about the classes that implement these objects.
They only know about the abstract classes defining the interface.
So very very beneficial.
Again abstraction details you don't have to worry about the details so programming into an interface
will greatly reduce the implementation dependencies between the subsystems.
You have now provided loose coupling.
We can use interface types on variables return types of methods or parameter types on a method.
Again it makes the code more generic.
We could just pass around that super type.
The clients can keep using that super type and they don't have to know the details so the whole point
of it is to exploit them off polymorphism.
Right.
So when you do the utilize polymorphism you program to the super type and then at runtime things can
change.
All right you can have different notations based on the instance type of the object not the reference
type.
So the object is not locked into the actual code.
Things can be determined at runtime so pie more for them just at a high level.
Just to remind you I'm not going to go into the details but it may be a bit redundant to you.
But just to make sure we're on the same page here.
Imagine you have an abstract class animal.
You can't create an instance of an animal.
It has two actual implementations dog and a cat.
This is the classic example of when you use polymorphism when you program to the to an implementation.
Well that would be as you just create a bunch of Dog objects.
Right.
You have no concept of this abstract class animal.
You say dog day equals new dog and then you call methods on that dog did not bark.
So when you declare that variable D as type dog that's a concrete implementation it's not an interface
or an abstract class.
It forces us to code to that concrete implementation we have to know details of the dog the methods
in there and everything when you program to an interface using the super type what you would do is you
create a reference type on the left hand side.
You would say animal animal and then when you create your instance you would say new dog then the animal
can call methods inside the abstract class make sound but you don't actually know the instance type
of the animal.
It could be a dog or could be a cat.
So we know it's a dog when we create it.
But now we can use the animal reference piling more more fiscally and that's what this animal that makes
sound is.
You can also now store the Animal objects in an array which are all the same type and then again it
reduces code polymorphic as well because then you can iterate through the array called the same method
at runtime the method will be different based on the instance type.
So even better rather than hard coding the institution of the subtype instantiation of the subtype like
new dog into the code you can assign the concrete implantation object at runtime.
So what you can do here and this is what design patterns would do is you don't actually have to say
new dog you can just say get animal and get animal will be implemented in some concrete class through
some interface and then you could see Ada make sound.
So now you even see the benefits even more clearly.
We don't actually know what the animal subtype is pointing to.
We don't know the instance type.
All we care about is that it knows how to make a sound right.
So there's that level of abstraction.
There's no details needed to be known by the clients of the implementation of dog or in this case any
animals if you use the make sound method or get animal method.
So after classes versus interfaces I mentioned these terms are used interchangeably and you'll hear
this throughout the course.
I tend to use teams interchangeably but there are some subtle differences and I mentioned them already.
They've gotten smaller and smaller those differences as Java has been released and new versions and
specifically in Java a they the designers introduced the concept of default methods and interfaces.
So now before that it was a little.
The differences were a little clearer because basically abstract methods had some default behavior input
interfaces never had the ability do that but in Java 8 now it's reduced Java you can have default behavior
variables and interfaces are public static final they also have some properties but they can only be
public static final abstract classes can actually use different access modifiers you know they can be
private.
So that's one difference why you'd want to use an abstract class so you can make your member variables
private and protected methods and interfaces are always public or public static as well as the variables.
So again another subtle difference where meth is an abstract classes cannot be private.
So again for encapsulation it sometimes is better to use abstract classes you'll want to utilize after
our classes to establish relationship between inner related objects when you want to share code amongst
several closely related classes then this is a common state of behavior can be put in the abstract class
just like inheritance except in the abstract class you have to implement the abstract methods in any
of the classes that implement that abstract typically the way to go to is usually abstract classes although
interfaces also have some advantages when you also worry about access modifiers you want to utilize
interfaces to establish a relationship between unrelated classes.
So the interface is comparable and colonial are implemented by many unrelated classes.
So utilize interfaces if you want to specify the behavior particular data type but are not concerned
about who implements its behavior.
You don't have to worry about commonality even though you know this is kind of a loose statement because
even with interfaces you sometimes want to group things together.
You don't really want to have a generic interface that is doing is not cohesive that's all over the
place.
You still have some relation there but in general abstract classes have more grouping where interfaces
may have less grouping and that's how you kind of think about when you say should I use an interface
or should I use master class in Java.
Well typically you can utilize the grouping as a starting point but again I don't really like to see
interfaces that have 50 methods in them that are doing tons of unrelated things right.
You still want to group and to some extent so utilize interfaces if you want to take advantage of multiple
inheritance as well.
Java does not support multiple inheritance but one of the work arounds is this is using interfaces right
because you can implement multiple interfaces multiple interfaces a whole multiple here necessary as
a whole other topic and there are other tradeoffs with using it on the designer's Java chose not to
allow it because there is cyclic dependencies and other issues but some of the design patterns actually
want you to use multiple inheritance because this is a Java class will stay away from that and I'll
provide alternatives.
But in general you can use interfaces to take advantage of multiple inheritance in Java using abstract
classes or interfaces is not about one being better than the other it's really about the use case.
Do you need to group things do you not need to group things.
Again I tend to use abstract classes a bit more because of you know the access modifiers you might create
an interface and then have an abstract class implement an interface as well.
So there are many different options at this point.
I'd like to bring up intelligent and go through a little demonstration a coding example of this concept
of program to an interface
so let's go ahead.
Click on ontology and we'll create a new project that basically just demonstrates this design principle.
So we create new project and I'm not going include any defaults would be using Java eleven for all our
demonstrations.
I am going to just create a command line application as a template and I'm going to name this programming
to an interface example
and let's go ahead and finish that so we're here we have our nice intelligent and you'll see our main
class was created for us just for the purposes of this demonstration.
The demonstration that I want to provide that demonstrates the that that explains the concept program
interface is a concept of a complete computer monitor right.
Typically in the real world you can have a computer monitor and it can be designed for display purposes
right.
You display information the actual product is a computer.
The computer monitor is a part or a module of the computer which is responsible for displaying information
later the client is going to need to change and they want to display on a projector.
Right.
So use case would be Hey currently we're gonna display on a computer monitor later in the future maybe
want to display on a projector.
So the change there is in the projector.
So what that means is the display module object that we write.
It should be flexible it needs to change.
So we want to change dynamically runtime.
This is a perfect opportunity to program to an interface someone to start by basically creating my interface.
So let's remove this code for now.
And I'm going to not make it public as I'm put everything in the same file.
But let's not create an interface in Java we just use the interface keyword.
And I'm going to name this interface display module.
The only method that I want to implement in here is a display method.
So I'm just gonna make that public void display it's not going to take any parameters.
This is my interface.
I'm going to program to this interface when I'm a client and the display method you see is kind of generic
and again it's going to allow us to display either to a computer monitor or to a projector.
So now we have two classes that implement this interface and again you may ask yourself why not use
an abstract class in this case.
Well because this is a simple example and there's no real grouping related or common behavior I'm going
to put this in interface for for demonstration purposes.
Now I want to actually create my class that implements this interface and that's going to be called
monitor and it's just going to implement implement the display module so implements display module.
Right.
Pretty basic stuff here.
This is just going to implement the display method.
So I have a public void display and this is going to actually have any behavior it's not going to actually
display on a module so really what I'm going to do is and you'll see this is a common theme throughout
the classes.
I just got a hard code some string his output so I'll just say system that out that print line and I'll
just say display through a monitor.
And this is basically going to tell us that the display method for the Monitor class was invoked polymorphic.
So display through a monitor.
Right.
Pretty pretty basic.
I have to create my other class if I want to display on a projector.
It can be very similar.
It's just going to be Dean's private projector.
It's going to implement the same interface right.
It's going to have the same method except it in this case the output is going to just say display on
a projector.
Pretty straightforward.
So here we say system that out that print line display through projector.
Right.
So we have our interface we have our two concrete classes that implement this interface.
The next step is creating utilizing the classes right.
So to actually have a main method that shows you the benefits of using the interface class as opposed
to knowing about the detailed implementations of the monitor and project you'll notice that the client
doesn't even need to necessarily know about these.
And we could actually expand this by writing our own get display module method if we wanted to to even
make it more abstract.
But for this purposes let's just show the benefits.
So now I want to create a public class and actually I don't want to create a public as I have a different
file name.
So let's just say class computer likes I will need to create a public because I've got to compile some
public class computer.
And in this case I'm going to create an instance I'm going to use aggregation composition here.
I'm going to create my display module object as a member variable and I'm going to CDM Walter Lotus
here as I'm using the interface I'm not using a concrete class.
This is gonna allow me to pass it around polymorphic.
Now for simplicity I'm going to copy and paste a couple of methods.
The first method here is gonna be a set display module and this is just going to basically setup our
instance variable right.
Public void set display module takes a display module object.
It sets up our member variable that's pretty basic.
And then I'm also gonna have a display method which is this going to call the display method polymorphic
CLI depending on the instance type of the display module DRM it will call it.
So just as DRM that display.
That's pretty straightforward.
The key here is how we use it.
Right.
How we call the display and how we call that to set display module.
But again what you'll notice here is as mentioned in the previous lecture slides here we're using the
super type display module right display module.
We don't have any concrete types yet project or monitor because we're programming to an interface.
All of our return mat return data are parameters to the methods or objects can refer to the super type.
And that D couples the super type or the concrete classes from the client computer.
All right.
So now we can go we can modify project monitor we can modify it as much as we want without actually
affecting the client the computer class the display we can add all sorts of new things so we can also
actually add another class if a new way of displaying something came about like not a not a projector
I actually call this project but you know if we wanted to display something on a tablet for example
we create a new tablet class and just implement an interface and we'd have to change the client at all
especially if we don't have that get method.
So now we want to create our stuff our nice main method
and inside here we're going to use our interface for government program to the interface itself.
So we're gonna create a new space flame monitor actually we'll create a new computer first so we can
access that member variable we'll say computer CRM equals new computer.
Right.
We have our default constructor doesn't do anything.
We're going to create a couple display modules right.
A new monitor and a new projector.
Again we can make this even more generic by actually adding a get method to the interface itself.
So we won't have to.
And we could have dynamic some kind of maybe some kind of creation or design pattern like a factory.
But again for these purposes let's create two instances of our display module again the reference type
on the left hand side and the instance type the concrete class in the right hand side now we can pop
him polymorphic we call the different methods and you'll see the different implementations being executed.
So let's go ahead and set our display module for each one of our computers whether it be a projector
or not whether it be a actual monitor.
So here we set up our computer and we're going to set the display module as a monitor online 40 online
41 or to call the display method.
And what you'll notice is polymorphic CLI that's going to end up calling right through polymorphism
it's going to call our display through monitor and that's gonna be printed out.
We then sent change a display message display module because hey in the future change when our using
a projector we simply call that set display module and we call display and now magically we're displaying
through a projector.
And that's really the whole goal of program your interface.
You can now only refer to a computer call methods on the computer and at runtime you're going to polymorphic
CLI invoke the right code based on the instance type.
And so it makes your client much more flexible.
Right.
Your client doesn't necessarily need to know the details on the monitor in the projector.
All it needs to know really is about the interface and the display method.
I mean you had to know what object to create on the right hand side.
But again we could get away from that if we had a get method or a factory method.
So if we go and try to compile this and run it you'll see that pi more efficiently it is running a different
thing.
So I forgot to rename my file I need to have this as computer since the default was main.
So quickly do that to fix the error I usually use to refactor and we'll just call this computer.
So now we build and run.
You'll see that again polymorphism and used any benefits programming into an interface
we've got to run computer.
And so again you see his output display through monitor for display through projector.
And that really is the benefits of programming to an interface.
Again the client can change the display option dynamically just by calling set display module.
We created our nice interface display module.
This is all the display equipment must implement this interface and provide its own implementation of
a display operation whether projecting or not projecting.
So you always want to code through an interface so you can change your strategy at runtime with actual
implementation and provides loose coupling and has a lot of Vantage is and you will see throughout the
course when we implement design patterns that this is a common concept that we follow.